## 2 Related work

An action is instrumental to an objective when it helps achieve that objective. Some actions are instrumental to a range of objectives, making them convergently instrumental . The claim that power-seeking is convergently instrumental is an instance of the instrumental convergence thesis :

Several instrumental values can be identified which are convergent in the sense that their attainment would increase the chances of the agent's goal being realized for a wide range of final goals and a wide range of situations, implying that these instrumental values are likely to be pursued by a broad spectrum of situated intelligent agents [Bostrom, 2012].

For example, in Atari games, avoiding (virtual) death is instrumental for both completing the game and for optimizing curiosity [Burda et al., 2019]. Many AI alignment researchers hypothesize that most advanced AI agents will have concerning instrumental incentives, such as resisting deactivation [Soares et al., 2015, Milli et al., 2017, Hadfield-Menell et al., 2017, Carey, 2018] and acquiring resources [Benson-Tilsen and Soares, 2016].

We formalize power as the ability to achieve a wide variety of goals. Appendix A demonstrates that our formalization returns intuitive verdicts in situations where information-theoretic empowerment does not [Salge et al., 2014].

Some of our results relate the formal power of states to the structure of the environment. Foster and Dayan [2002], Drummond [1998], Sutton et al. [2011], Schaul et al. [2015] note that value functions encode important information about the environment, as they capture the agent's ability to achieve different goals. Turner et al. [2020] speculate that a state's optimal value correlates strongly across reward functions. In particular, Schaul et al. [2015] learn regularities across value functions, suggesting that some states are valuable for many different reward functions ( i . e . powerful). Menache et al. [2002] identify and navigate towards convergently instrumental bottleneck states.

We are not the first to study convergence of behavior, form, or function. In economics, turnpike theory studies how certain paths of accumulation tend to be optimal [McKenzie, 1976]. In biology, convergent evolution occurs when similar features ( e . g . flight) independently evolve in different time periods [Reece and Campbell, 2011]. Lastly, computer vision networks reliably learn e . g . edge detectors, implying that these features are useful for a range of tasks [Olah et al., 2020].